Project 1: A Backend that translates Bril into C (#41)
sampsyo/cs6120: content/blog/2019-09-25-bril-c-backend.md

Why choose C?
---
Translating to C provides some benefits such as portability, good performance, and easier integration with other C library and tools. C language is a widely used language in many embedded devices. We can also get native performance and leverage the GCC compiler's optimization. By translating to C, we can easily integrate it with other C library. Plus, because the Bril instructions (as it is now) can be mapped to C statements, we can also potentially use gdb as a debugger.
Lastly, Translating to C is very common in the programming community and can be a fun project!

Method
---
As of now, Bril only has one main function. For the sake of simplicity, I first collect all the name and type of variables used in the Bril program, and declare them at the top of the generated C code with the corresponding type, where I use `int64_t` for `int` and `int` for `bool`. Then, all the arithmetic, comparison, and logic instructions can be directed translate to corresponding C statement. For label and `jmp` instructions, I use `label` and `goto` in C. The instruction `br` can also be easily translated to statement compose of `if` and `goto`.

> In order to verify the correctness of this C backend, I create some valid handwritten tests to verify against the existing interpreter `brili`. The C backend successfully passes all the tests.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In order to verify the correctness of this C backend, I created some valid handwritten tests to verify against the existing interpreter `brili`. The C backend successfully passes all the tests.
```

Here we show a small example to demonstrate the translation.
```
main {
  a: int = const 4;
  b: int = const 4;
  cmp: bool = ge a b;
  jmp somewhere;
  a: int = const 2;
  somewhere:
  c: int = add a b;
  print c;
  print cmp;
}
```

> The above Bril program can be translate to C as the following.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The above Bril program can be translated to C as the following.
```

```C
#include <stdint.h>
#include <stdio.h>
#include <inttypes.h>
int main(){
int64_t a;
int64_t b;
int cmp;
int64_t c;
a = 4LL;
b = 4LL;
cmp = a >= b;
goto somewhere;
a = 2LL;

> somewhere:;

Reviewer: Is this an extraneous `;` or intentional?

Author: Yes because we need to have a statement after a goto label in C. Extraneous `;` make it an empty statement and thus is valid. It is easier this way because in Bril we don't require a statement after label.

c = a + b;
printf("%" PRId64 "\n", c);
printf(cmp?"true\n":"false\n");
return 0;
}
```

Implementation
---

> I implemented the translation tool in Python. The implementation is straightforward and it consists of 134 lines of code.  Compared to other projects such as one use LLVM  consists of 500+ lines of Cpp code and the other one generating JAVA bytecode consist of 400+ lines of Java code, I think it is safe to say that the implementation complexity of C backend is smaller.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
I implemented the translation tool in Python. The implementation is straightforward and consists of 134 lines of code.  Compared to other projects such as one using LLVM that consists of 500+ lines of C++ code and the other one generating Java bytecode consisting of 400+ lines of Java code, I think it is safe to say that the implementation complexity of C backend is smaller.
```

It's C++ and Java, not Cpp and JAVA.

Reviewer: Consider linking to those other projects you're referring to?

> The source code and tests can be found at [Bril2C](https://github.com/xu3kev/bril2c) . The tool to translate Bril JSON format to C is `bril2c.py`. It takes input on stdin and produces output on stdout.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The source code and tests can be found at [Bril2C](https://github.com/xu3kev/bril2c). The tool to translate Bril JSON format to C is `bril2c.py`. It takes input on stdin and produces output on stdout.
```

Benchmark
---

> I create some simple benchmark to measure the timing compared with the interpreter run in Node.js.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
I created some simple benchmarks to measure the timing compared with the interpreter run in Node.js.
```

> Each test was measured for running 1000 times. In order to avoid the startup time of Node.js, I slightly modify the `brili` interpreter to run the Bril program 1000 times internally so I can avoid running `brili` 1000 times.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Each test was measured while running 1000 times. In order to avoid the startup time of Node.js, I slightly modified the `brili` interpreter to run the Bril program 1000 times internally so I can avoid running `brili` 1000 times.
```

> The experiments are all run on Intel Xeon CPU E5-1630 v3 @ 3.70GHz with Ubuntu 16.04. Turbo boost is turned off and the scaling governor is set to performance.

Reviewer: Thanks for these additional system setup details!

The version of Node.js to run Bril interpreter is 12.11.0.

> The gcc version  is 5.4.0 and optimization flag is O3.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The gcc version  is 5.4.0 and the optimization flag is O3.
```

The benchmark result is as following.
<br>
<img src="../../img/c_backend_benchmark.png" width="500">
<br>

> The four test program are factorial computation, Fibonacci sequence, polynomial multiplication and matrix multiplication.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The four test programs are factorial computation, the Fibonacci sequence, polynomial multiplication and matrix multiplication.
```

> We can see that we gain a significant speedup across different tests. However, because Bril now has only bool and int type, the thing we can compute is still limited. In the future, as Bril extends more feature such as floating point arithmetic and array, we can have more practical benchmark.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We can see that we gain a significant speedup across different tests. However, because Bril now has only bool and int type, the things we can compute are still limited. In the future, as Bril extends with more features such as floating point arithmetic and arrays, we can have more practical benchmarks.
```

Conclusion
---

> In this project, I built a C backend for Bril. I verify its correctness and benchmark its performance on several tests. The result shows that compared with the `brili` interpreter, I gain a significant speedup.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this project, I built a C backend for Bril. I verified its correctness and benchmarked its performance on several tests. The result shows that compared with the `brili` interpreter, it gains a significant speedup.
```

It doesn't matter which tense you use (present tense like "verify" and "benchmark") or past tense (like "built"), but it is important to be consistent. This suggestion arbitrarily selects the past tense.
